1 Paul, an envoy, not appointed by any human authorities nor by any individual but by Jesus, Cod's Anointed, and by God, Creator and Benefactor, who raised Jesus from among the dead, rand from all my associates, to the communities [of the Anointed] in Galatia. 'May favor and genuine pea. from God our Great Benefactor and from our lord Jesus, Cod's Anointed, be yours. "In accordance with God's purpose to rescue us from the present evil age, Jesus devoted his life to free us from oursirJvl fate. 'Highest praise to God whose new world never ends! Amen! 'I'm amazed by how quickly you have abandoned the one who called you by the favor of God's Anointed and have em-braced an entirely different message. 'There is no other world-transforming message, but there are people who are contusing you and want to pervert the truth about God's Anointed. "Even if one of us, or for that matter a messenger from heaven, were to advocate a message different from the one we delivered—they must be rejected and shunned!"We told you before and now I repeat it: anyone who champions a message 
other than the one you heard from us—they must be rejected and shunned! "Am 1 now trying to win a popularity contest, or to win God's approval? If I were still looking for human approval, I would not be the Anointed's slave. "Let me make it clear, friends, the message I announced does not conform to human expectations. "I say this because it was not transmitted to me by anyone nor did anyone teach it to me. Rather, it came to me as an insight from God about Jesus as God's Anointed. "Surely you've heard of my own behavior as a practicing Jew, how aggressively I harassed God's new community, try-ing to wipe R out. "I went way beyond most of my contem-poraries in my observance of Judaism, and became notably zealous about my ancestral traditions. "However, when the One who designated me before 1 was born and commissioned me to be an envoy, surprising all human expectations, chose to make his son "known through me with the intent that I would proclaim God's world-transforming news to the nations, I did not rush off to consult with anyone. "Neither did I set out for Jerusalem to get the approval of those who became envoys for God's Anointed before ! did. Instead, I left for Arabia and afterward returned to Damascus. "Then, three years later I went up to Jerusalem to get ac- quainted with Cephas, and I stayed with him for two full weeks. "I did not meet any of the Anointed's other envoys ex-cept James, our lord's brother. What I am writing to you is not a lie, w help or God! "Afterwards I traveled to the regions of Syria and Cilicia. "The command. in Judea for whom Jesus is God's Anointed had no idea what ! looked like. "They knew 
we only by reputation: "The one who used to harass us is now advocating 'the faith' that he once tried to wipe out." "And so they praised Cod because of me. 2 Fourteen years later I returned to Jerusalem with Barnabas and took Titus along. 'I went in response to divine direction. There ! expressly communicated in private to those who were reputed to be leaders of the Jerusalem assembly the world-transforming message that I preach to the nations so that those leaders would not fail to grasp the point of the race I've been running. 'lit fact, they did not require my companion Titus, though a Creek, to be circumcised. °But some, pretending friendship, infiltrated the meeting to undermine our freedom in God's Anointed, Jesus, and to enslave an again. 'However, we did not cave in to their demands fora moment, for we were determined to preserve the truth of God's world-transforming message for you Galatians. 'In fact, those who were reputed to be leaders—it makes no difference to me what they were, since God does not pay attention to reputation—the reputed leaders added nothing to what I had to say. 'On the contrary, they recognized that God had entrusted me with the task of announcing God's world-transforming message to the uncircumcised, just as Peter had been entrusted with taking it to the circumcised. "For it was evident that the God who worked through Peter as envoy to the circumcised worked through we as envoy to the rest of the world. ?When they realized that God had given we this special role, James, Cephas and John, the reputed pil-lars [of the Movement] extended the right hand of fellowship to Barnabas and we and agreed that we should go to the 
nations and they to the circumcised. "Their only condition was that we remember the poor—something I was eager to do. "Nonetheless, when Cephas came to Antioch, I confronted him publicly because he was clearly in the wrong. "Before representatives of James came to Antioch, Cephas would eat with those from the nations, But when they arrived, he avoided and kept his distance from those people because he feared those who were advocating circumcision. "In turn, the rest of the Jewish followers also began to waffle, with the result that even Barnabas was carried away by their duplicity. "But when I saw they were behaving in a way that was incon-sistent with the meaning of God's world-transforming mes-sage, I challenged Cephas in front of the whole group. I said: If it is all right for you, a Jew, to live like somebody from the nations and not practice Jewish customs, how can you pos-sibly insist that people from the nations adopt Jewish prac-tices? "We may be Jews by birth and we may look at people of the nations as ignorant and corrupt, ”but we now see that no one becomes acceptable to God by relying on traditional religious practices. We gain this acceptance only through a confidence in God like that of Jesus, God's Anointed. So we put our confidence in God along with the Anointed, Jesus, in order to be acceptable to God based on a confidence like that of God's Anointed, rather than by relying on traditional religious practices. The truth of the matter is "no one will be acceptable to God" on the basis of traditional religious prac-tices. "If it then toms out that in our desire to be acceptable to God in the way that the Anointed was, we are regarded as ignorant and corrupt, does that mean that God's Anointed is 
Of course not! 
"The point is, if I now endorse what I previously rejected, then l am demonstrating that I have no integrity. "In fact, my old identity, defined by religious customs, passed away, so that a new Cod-given identity could come to life. I was cruci-fied with the Anointed. "The person I used to be no longer lives. God's Anointed lives in me; and the bodily life I now live, I live by the same confident trust in God that the "son of God" had. He loved me and gave up his life for my benefit. "I do not set aside God's generosity as if it didn't matter las some do]. If acceptance by God comes about through tra-ditional religious observances, then God's Anointed died for no reason! 3 You clueless Galatians! Who has cast an evil eye on you, putting you under a spell? Your own eyes saw Jesus, God's Anointed, graphically portrayed on a cross. 'Tell me this: Did you experience God's presence and power by relying on tradi-tional religious practices or by being convinced by what you heard? 'How stupid can you be? Do you really think that what was begun by God's presence and power can be completed by a merely earthly life? 'Has everything you experienced meant nothing to you? Surely it meant something! 'Is the one, who empowers and works miracles among you, able to do no because you rely on traditional religious practices or because you are convinced by the message you heard? "You're in the same situation as Abraham. [As scripture says]: "Abraham put his trust in God, and God counted that the right thing to do." 'From this you ought to draw the con-clusion that Abraham's heirs are those born of confidence in 
God. Indeed, scripture anticipated what is happening right now, namely that God acknowledges that the nations are right to put their confidence in God. Scripture announced this beforehand to Abraham when it says, "Because of you all the nations will be blessed." 'For that reason those who put their confidence in God are blessed just like Abraham. "On the other hand, whoever relies on 1.ditional religious practices is under a curse, because it is written, "Everyone who does not honor all the things written in the book of the law by observing them is accursed." "It is clear that no one is accept-able to God by relying on traditional religious practices. As scripture says: "The one who lives on the basis of confidence in God gets it right." "But the religious practices spelled out in the book of the law are not derived from confidence in God; so it is written, "Those who observe its requirements will have to live by them." "God's Anointed freed us from the curse of subjection to the law, by becoming a curse for us, since it is written, "Anyone who is crucified is accursed." "This was done so that Abraham's blessing might come to the nations by belonging to the Anointed Jesus, and no that we might receive the promise of God's pretence and power through putting our unconditional trust in God. "My friends, I'll use an example from daily life: once a person's last will is recorded, no one else is able to annul or alter it. "Now the promises of inheritance were made to Abraham "and to his offspring." Scripture does not say, "and to offsprings," as though there were many of them, but it says, 
"and to your offspring" in the singular which refers to God's Anointed. "Here is what I mean: the commitment to Abraham, validated by Cod, is not something invalidated 930 years later when the law came, as though God reneged on the promise made earlier. "After all, if that inheritance were grounded in the law, then itmi gift no longer be bared on a promise. But God gave it as a gift to Abraham by way of a promise. "then why the need for the law? It was provided to restrain our undisciplined behavior until the arrival of the offspring to whom the inheritance was promised. The law was transmit-ted by divine messengers through a human mediator. "But a mediator implies that more than one was involved. [But God alone made the promise,' since God is one. "Does this mean the law is opposed to God's promises? Absolutely-not! If there were a law that had the power to cre-ate life, then our acceptance by God would indeed be based on the law. "But the scripture confined everything under the seductive power of corruption, in order that the promise that has come to fruition in Jesus the Anointed's complete confi-dence in God might be extended to those who share the same confidence. "Now before this kind of confidence in God ar-rived, we were under the surveillance of the law, held in bond-age until the awaited disclosure of such confidence. "In effect, then, the law served as our disciplinarian until God's Anointed came, so that we would become acceptable to God on the basis of our compete confidence in God. "Now that this mature confidence in God can be ours, we no Ringer have need for a disciplinarian."Indeed you are all' now God's adult offspring through the kind of confidence exemplified by God's Anointed, Jesus. "So, everyone of you who has been baptized into solidarity with God's Anointed has become in-vested with the status of God's Anointed. "You are no longer 
Jew or Greek, no longer slay or freebom, no longer "male and female." Instead, you all have the same status in the service of God's Anointed, Jesus. "Moreover, if you now belong to God's Anointed, that also makes you Abraham's offspring and—as promised—his heirs. 4 Let me put it this way: An heir who is still a minor, even though destined to inherit the whole estate, is no better off than a menial servant, 'but remains under the care of overseers and household managers until the time set by the father. 'It is the same with us; when like children we knew no better, we were dominated by the cosmic powers that controlled human fate. 'However, when the time for growing up arrived, Cod's was sent into the world, born of a woman, subject to the Jewish law, 'in order to emancipate those who were under the law, no that we might become God's "children" through adoption. 'Now because you are adopted, God sent into your hearts the same filial attitude toward God that was in Jesus, that can all God, "Abbe! Father!" 'So as a result, you are no longer menial servants, but through what God has done you have become adopted as "children" and that means heirs. "In the past, when you had no knowledge of God, you were dominated by powers that were not really divine. 'Now that you know God, or rather, God knows you, how can you return to those impotent and impoverished cosmic powers, let alone wish to be their menial servants again? "For example, you are still involved in observing days and months, seasons and years, as if that determined your fate! "I'm afraid my efforts on your behalf have been a waste of time. 
"I plead with you, my friends, to become like me, because I became like you (as one outside the law). You did not shun me then, "for as you recall, it was while I was ill that I first de-livered God's world-transforming message to you. "Although my illness was trying for you, you neither disdained nor scowed me; instead you welcomed me as God's own messen-ger, as you would the Anointed Jesus himself. "What happened then to that warm endorsement you gave me? I can testify that if you could have, you would have plucked out your own eyes and given them to me. "Have I now become your enemy by telling you the truth? "Others Are paying you plenty of attention, but not for your own good; they want to keep you away [from me), so that you will pay attention only to them. "It's always good to be well regarded in a good cause—and not only there when I'm with you. "My dear children, I'm having labor pains all over again with you, waiting until God's Anointed is formed in you! "I only wish I could be there with you now and could soften my tone of voice. 1 am at my wits' end about you! "Those of you who want to live under law, tell me: Don't you hear what the law says? "Stripture says that Abraham had two sons, one by a slave woman and the other by a free woman. "The difference was that the son of the slave was born naturally, the son of the free woman through God's promise. "This is all allegorical: these women represent two 
covenants. The one from Mount Sinai, who bears slave chil-dren, corresponds to Hagar. "This Hagar is Mount Sinai in Arabia; but she also corresponds to the present Jerusalem; she is in slavery with her children. "In contrast, it's the heavenly Jerusalem that is free—that's the one who is our mother. "In fact, scripture says: Cekbrate, you barren woman without children, break out into shouting, you without labor pains, because the barren woman will have more children than does the woman with a husband. "Now you, friends, are just like Isaac, you are children born by God's promise. "But just as it was bark then, so too now: the child conceived naturally tries to harass the one conceived by God's power. "Yet, what does scripture say? "Expel the slave woman and her son; because the slave woman's son will not share the inheritance with the free woman's son." "The conclusion, my friends, is that we are not children of the slave woman but of the free woman. 5 God's Anointed set us free so that we could live free; so stand your ground, and do not be subject again to the yoke of slavery. 'Now look! I, Paul, am telling you: if you get circumcised, God's Anointed can't do anything for you. tell you as em-phatically as I can once again: every person who gets circum-cised will have to observe the law in its entirety. 'You've cut yourself off from the Anointed, you who want to be accepted by God through relying on the law. You have deprived your-selves of Cod's great gift. 'We, on the other hand, are the ones who by the power of God and on the basis of a complete confidence in God are looking forward to the consummation of our hope. 'For those who belong to God's Anointed Jesus, neither the status of circumcision nor the lack of it makes any difference; only confidence in God made effective through love matters. 
'You were running in the right direction. Who impeded you Rom accepting the truth? "That bad advice did not come from the one who first called you. 'Remember the proverb, a little bit of leaven corrupts the whole batch of dough. "Our lord makes we confident that you will not disagree with my view. In any case, those stirring up trouble among you will have to answer for it, whoever they are. As for me, my friends, if I were actually still advocating circumcision, why am I still Ming harassed? For in that case the scandal of the cross is re-moved. "I wish that those who stir you up over circumcision would go all the way themselves and have everything cut off! "On the other hand, friends, you were called to a life of freedom. Don't use your freedom as a license for self-indul-gence but, out of love, serve one another. "After all, the whole law is summed tip in one injunction: "You are to love your neighbor as yourself." "But if you bite and nip at each other, watch out that you don't eat each other up. "Here's my advice: be guided by the presence of God's power, and do not give into sensual desires. "The impulse to Ire self-serving works against what God's power and presence inspire, and God's power and presence work against the im-pulse to be self-serving. These two are opposed to each other in such a may as to prevent you from doing what you want to do. "If you are guided by God's power and presence, you ore not restrained by the leash of the law. "The results of giv-ing in to self-serving desires are obvious: sexual immorality, moral corruption, flagrant indecency, "idol worship, sorcery, hitter hostility, violent conflict, jealousy, fits of anger, selfish ambition, diNisiveness, factionalism, "envy, drunkenness, orgies, and other such vices. I warn you again, just as I did before: people who engage in such activities will not inherit Cod's empire. "The evidence that God's power is present among us is seen in our selfless love, joyous demeanor, and genuine peace, our long-suffering patience, warm-heartedness, and moral integrity, our trustworthiness, "gentleness, and self-control. iThere R no law against such virtues "Those who belong to God's Anointed, Jesus, have crucified their former way of life along with its passions and desires. "If God's power has given us life, we should live in accordance with God's power "Let's not have any swelled heads, name-callers or backstabbers among us. 6 Friends, if someone is found to have strayed off course in some way, you, who really experienced Cod's power and presence, must gently get that person back on track. And at the same time look out for yourselves so that you also won't be tempted. 'Shoulder each other's loads, and in this way you will carry out the "law of God's Anointed." 'Indeed, if people think they're something special when they're not, they are deluding themselves. 'You should be bru-tally honest about your own conduct, and then you will keep your boasting only to yourself and not impose it on somebody else. 'We all must carry our own load. 'When you receive instruction, you most give a share of your worldly goods to your teacher. 'Don't deceive yourselves: God cannot be sneered at. As everyone knows, "People reap what they sow." "If you sow to sustain your earthly life, you will from that earthly life reap corruption, but if you sow for a God-empowered life you will from that power reap unending life. 'Don't give up on doing the right thing; the day will come when we'll reap our harvest, so don't despair. "In conclusion, as long as we have the opportunity, we should keep doing what's right for the benefit of all, and .pe-
daily for those with whom we share our confidence and trust in God. "e.s. (Notice how large the letters are when I write to you in my own hand!) "Those who are pressuring you to be cir-cumcised seek only to make themselves look good and then only to avoid being harassed for the Anointed's cross. "These advocates of circumcision do not observe the law themselves, yet they want you to get circumcised no they can take pride in your altered flesh. "As for me, I absolutely refuse to take pride in anything except the cross of our lord, Jesus, God's Anointed—the same cross that crucified this world for me and me for this world. "Because being circumcised or not being circumcised does not matter; what matters is a new world. "Peace and mercy upon those who lead their lives by this principle, as well as on the Israel of God. "From nom on, don't give me any more grief! I have the scars of Jesus on my body. "May the favor of our lord, Jesus, God's Anointed, be yours, friends. Amen! 
